Chapter 2 - Section 2.: Step 1 — Needs

   Critical to mapping is the anchor and hence you must first focus on the user need. This requires you to define the scope of what you’re looking at — are we a tea shop, an automotive company, a nation state or a specific system? The trick is to start somewhere. You will often find that in the process of mapping you need to expand or reduce your scope and there is nothing wrong with this. A map for a particular company is part of a wider map for the ecosystem that the company operates within. A map of a particular system within a company is part of the map for the entire company. You can expand and reduce as necessary. It’s worth noting that the user needs of one map are components in another. For example, the user needs for a company producing nuts and bolts become the components used (i.e. nuts and bolts) for a company producing automobiles or bridges.

   In our first map the user needs for an electricity provider are simply drawn as a single component far down the value chain of our map and described as power. As a user, we could describe our needs for power as being reliable, utility like, provided in standard forms and accessible. From the perspective of examining an online photo service then a single component is enough. However, that single component will break into an entire map for an electricity provider including different forms of transmission, generation and even spot markets. A single node on one map can be an entire map from another person’s perspective. Equally, the entire map of your business might be a single component for someone else.

   Hence start with a scope and define the user needs for that scope. Be careful though because a common trap is not to think of your user’s needs but instead to start to describe your own needs i.e. your desire to make a profit, to sell a product or be successful. Yes, your business is a user with its own needs but this is different from say your public customers. To keep things simple for now, focus on them.

   You need to think precisely about what your user needs. If you’re a tea shop then your users may have needs such as a refreshing drink, a convenient location, a comfortable environment, a quick service and a tasty treat like a piece of lemon drizzle cake. This in turn requires you to have the capability to satisfy those needs. If you don’t then your plan for world domination of the tea industry might be abruptly halted. At the same time, you should distinguish between the many things that your users want but do not necessarily need. So start with questions such as what does this thing need to do, how will its consumers interact with it and what do they expect from it? There are various techniques to help elucidate this but I’ve found nothing more effective than talking directly to your own users. Creating a user journey for how they interact with what you provide is always a good start.

   As you discuss with users, along with the usual list of wants (i.e. I want my cup of tea to make me fabulously witty, slim and handsome) then you might find they have genuine unmet needs or novel needs that they find difficult in describing. These are important. Don’t ignore them just because you don’t provide them at this time. Back in 2005, our user needs for the online photo service included such things as sharing photos online with other users. This required us to have a capability such as the storage of digital photos and a web site to upload and share them with others. These capabilities are your highest level components and the manifestation of your user needs. For us, that included the storage of digital photos, manipulation of images (removal of red-eye, cropping), sharing of images via the web site and printing to physical products from photos to mouse mats. This is shown in figure 13.
See    Figure 13: User needs
 for more details.
