Chapter 7 - Section 2.1.: That first question

   The standard model I’ve outlined contains the random appearance of innovation, different rates of diffusion and both sustaining and disruptive change. Whilst it sounds simple, it it is hopelessly complex in practice. It was probably a day or two after I had decided that this was probably a lost cause that I thought of the first question that I needed to ask. What actually constitutes an innovation?

   Whether something is an innovation or not partially depends upon the perspective of the observer. Hence, the Bessemer convertor was a process improvement to iron and steel manufacturers but a product innovation to suppliers of equipment for those industries. Equally, the modern day provision of computing resources through large utility suppliers (such as Amazon’s EC2 service) is certainly a new business model for those suppliers but for its consumers then the use of computing resources in business is hardly new.

   Jan Fagerberg defined innovation as the “first attempt to put an idea into practice”. Unfortunately, this equally applies to something novel or a feature improvement or a new business model for an existing activity. However, is a feature improvement to a phone really the same as the creation of the first phone? Is this equivalent to the introduction of rental service for phones? They are all called innovations but are they really the same or are we using one word to describe many different types of change? Maybe this was the confusion? I was looking at the diffusion of innovations but maybe we were talking about diffusion of different types of innovation?

   Somehow, in a mad frenzy of writing on whiteboards, I connected three pieces of information to challenge my view of random and equivalent innovation impacting across society. Rogers and Kincaid in “Towards a new Paradigm of Research” published the first piece of the puzzle in 1981. When examining continuous and sustaining technological innovation, they noted that the rate of improvement tends to be slow and then accelerates until reaching a plateau of a more mature and slow improving stage. Each improved version increasingly adds definition, eventually providing something that can be considered feature complete, mature and generally well understood. The insight here is that the maturing of a technology requires multiple improved versions with each reducing uncertainty about the technology.

   The second piece of the puzzle was published in 1996 by Paul Strassmann, a great and often under acknowledged economist. In “The value of computers, information & knowledge”, Strassmann showed that within business there was no correlation between IT spending and the value it created for the business. The work demonstrated that IT wasn’t one thing but instead consisted of many activities. The insight here is that organisations consist of multiple components some of which create value whilst others did not.

   The third piece was a Harvard Business Review paper, “Does IT Matter”, published by Nicholas Carr in 2003. This paper discussed the IT industry and demonstrated that as certain aspects of IT became widespread and common they had diminishing differential value and became more of a cost of doing business.

   In isolation the three pieces were interesting to note but in combination they implied something remarkable but obvious in hindsight about how activities (i.e. the things we do) change.
     * Activities evolved through multiple improving versions.
     * Activities were not uniform; any system could contain multiple components which were at different stages of evolution i.e. there was no “IT” but a mass of components that made “IT”.
     * The characteristics of activities changed as they evolved; as they became more commonplace they had diminishing differential value, became more of a cost of doing business and more certain. The improving versions of the same activity would have different characteristics. These seemed to imply that climatic patterns I had noticed were occurring but somehow I just couldn’t get evolution to fit with diffusion. I felt that I must be wrong. Then, I started to realise that maybe these two processes are related but separate.

   Maybe I had just got stuck on trying to tie diffusion of innovation to evolution? What if instead, evolution consisted of multiple waves of diffusion e.g. the diffusion of the first innovation of the act followed by waves of diffusions of improving innovations? Maybe those waves were different? An examination of historical records clearly showed that technological change tends to mature through multiple waves of diffusion of ever-improved versions. The pattern of evolution was there and I had collected a wealth of data over the years which suggested it. I just had to break out of the shackles of diffusion.

