Chapter 6 - Section 2.: How to implement mapping

   Most organisations have structures in place that can be used to embed mapping whether it’s an architectural group or an office of the CEO or a business relationship function or some other home. Typically, in a distributed organisation then you normally have the business units that are responsible for delivery, some form of executive function that covers policy, approval and accountability and a common or shared services supply group that provides some element of commonality as per figure 62.
See    Figure 62: Common structure
 for more details.
   However, the common components provided are often a bit hit or miss. Without a form of mapping then it’s difficult to find what is duplicated and how it should be provided between the different business units. It will often degenerate into plucking things from the air. There also tends to be an element of political conflict between the business units and the shared services and in the worst cases the shared services function can be viewed as a hindrance.

   To resolve this, we need to separate out the delivery of shared services from the identification of what is common. I’ve found the best way to achieve this is not to remove budget from the business units (often a political bone of contention) but instead to introduce a co-ordination function. The role of the co-ordination function is to encourage compliance to policy (doctrine) often via a spend control mechanism and to enable sharing between the business units through the use of maps. This doesn’t require some big bang overhaul but usually the formalisation of an existing structure e.g. Office of an executive function or an architectural board can be converted into this role. When spend control is used then a policy limit (e.g. £100K) should be set above which any project must be mapped and the map sent to the co-ordination function. The function can then analyse the map, make recommendations and introduce elements of transparency and challenge within the organisation. As more maps are
   gathered then the function can also identify patterns for common services. This should become a relatively quick process lasting a few hours from initiation to recommendation.

   It’s through such a function that other forms of doctrine such as cell based structure, use of Pioneer-Settler-Town Planner along with more context specific gameplay can be introduced into the business units. I’ve summarised this in figure 63, adding in the co-ordination function (point 1). I’ve also noted that your shared service (point 2) should be elevated to a business unit and not just limit itself to provision of common components within a organisation but look to public provision, particularly if you intend to run an ecosystem model such as ILC. If it’s important enough for you to create a shared and common service, then there either exists an outside market opportunity or you’re just rebuilding what already exists in the market.
See    Figure 63: Adding co-ordsination
 for more details.
   With your shared services group, then you should aim to populate it with small cells of town planners providing industrialised components. Your business units will tend to become dominated by cells of pioneers and settlers providing custom to product and rental services. Your co-ordination function will mainly become settlers focused on ensuring transparency and learning within the organisation itself. However, this is over time.

   It’s really important that if this is your first co-ordination function (in UK Government this was called Spend Control) that it is staffed by people with experience of “future” ways of operating i.e. you want them to challenge the organisation and pioneers can be useful here. In 2016, I still see companies creating a digital team and pointing the way by giving an example of good but without any mechanism to deal with the existing organisation. This invariably creates a them vs us situation and without any mechanism to force challenge then you’re likely to revert back to the past. The corporate antibodies will overwhelm you

   Hence start with a small co-ordination team of highly skilled people helping other business units create, share maps and learn from them. You will probably find that some business units start to offer their own home grown capabilities as common components to other business units. Don’t discourage these emergent behaviours. Whilst there may be an element of opportunistic “empire building” involved, if units are sharing and learning from maps then this is supportive. You can always migrate those components to a shared services group at a later date. The one thing to be careful of is business units trying to subvert the process e.g. trying to find exclusions to sharing or spend control.

   Often some will claim they are “too busy to write a map” or “it’s too complex”. For me, the idea that someone could be willing to spend £100K on something they can’t map sets alarm bells ringing. For such an expense we should know what the user needs are and what is involved. Mapping provides us the means to reflect on this, to challenge the assumptions, to question what is being considered and to demonstrate we have thought about it. Be warned however, these excuses are often code for resistance to sharing due to concerns that it will reduce their power base within an organisation. Knowledge is power often translates to shared knowledge is less power for me! If you ever want to stop the self-harm that occurs in corporations from the endless duplication and bias to the poor gameplay, then you need to counter this. Expect a few battles and a few bruises.

   You’ll also have lots of people claim that “we have architecture groups” or “good communication”. Most federated organisations have hundreds of duplicated examples of the same thing being built and communication is anything but effective. Ask yourself, how many pet IoT or AI projects doing roughly the same thing are actually going on in your organisation right now? If you’re of any size the answer is “don’t know” or “not sure” then from experience, it’s going to be vastly more than whatever number you might guess at. Without a communication tool such as mapping and some form of co-ordination function then you will be unlikely to find out. Hence use this issue of duplication to help introduce a common language and the sharing of information.

   Be warned though, resistance to this sharing will clamour for exclusions and protection of silos. Fall for this and any emergent sharing will be lost. Also keep an eye on communication mechanism from chat to wikis because they can be used to consolidate resistance as much as enable change. You’ll have to be firm.

   To the question, shouldn’t the co-ordination function be part of the executive function then I’d answer yes. In my company, the co-ordination function was the executive team. In a larger company you will want to create a specialised unit. Remember, you are unlikely to have any maps of your landscape and your SVPs & VPs won’t be able to magic them out of hand. They’ll need support and help as much of this will be as unfamiliar to them as it was for me.

