Chapter 7 - Section 4.: Comments on and the limits of evolution

   It’s important to note that unlike diffusion, evolution cannot be determined over time. It can only be measured over the ubiquity of the act versus its certainty i.e. how complete, well understood and fit for purpose it is. Whilst we can use the evolution curve to say that a specific component will evolve over an undetermined amount of time to become more of a commodity, we cannot say precisely when this will happen but only what will happen if it survives. It is less prediction (in the formal sense of change over time) and more anticipation of change.

   Furthermore, the evolution curve can only be precisely determined for the past i.e. the act needs to become stable and reach the point of certainty for us to determine its point of ubiquity and therefore calculate the path it has taken. This means we cannot accurately determine where something is on the evolution curve until it has become a commodity, at which point we can determine where it was in the past. Hence, we are forced to rely on a cheat sheet based upon changing characteristics ([106]chapter 2) along with weak signal analysis to estimate where something is.

   There is unfortunately, no crystal ball to the future and we have to embrace a degree of uncertainty until it reaches the point of stability and becomes certain. Since we must rely on changing characteristics and weak signals (if available) to determine where something is on a map then a current map is developed from the consensus of those involved. This can be manipulated or influenced by existing bias hence it is important to not only be transparent with the maps but allow for challenge to them. The maps are imperfect representations of what exists and the axis do constrain a view of the world based upon the anchor (user need), the value chain (position) and evolution (movement). The mapper must accept that the maps are not real any more than a geographical map is real. The question however is not whether it is real but whether it is useful.

   As evolution deals with the change to the act itself, it does not care whether some specific change is incremental or disruptive to the past. A company may produce a better product (e.g. a better cable excavator) or instead a product may be substituted by another (e.g. cable vs. hydraulic excavators) but the act of “digging holes” doesn’t change. Instead we simply have a more evolved way of doing this. Today, the evolution of computing infrastructure from product to utility is disruptive for the past product industry but the act of consuming computing infrastructure isn’t new, it is simply more evolved.

   Every activity I have examined throughout history follows this path.
     * The genesis of the humble screw can be traced back to Archytas of Tarentum (400 BC). The principle was later refined by Archimedes and also used to construct devices to raise water. Over the next two thousand years most screws (and any associated bolts) were cut by hand however demand for screw threads and fasteners created increasing pressure for a more industrialised process. J and W Wyatt had patented such a concept in 1760 and Jesse Ramsden in 1770 introduced the first form of screw cutting lathe. However without a practical means of achieving industrialisation and with no standards then the industry continued primarily as was. Maudslay then introduced the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800 that combined elements such as the slide rest, change gears and lead-screw to achieve the effect. However, whilst screws and bolts could be manufactured with inter-changeable components, the lack of any standards thwarted general inter-changeability. In 1841, James Whitworth
       collected a large number of samples from British manufacturers and proposed a set of standards including the angle of thread and threads per inches. The proposals became standard practice in 1860 and a highly standardised and industrialised sector developed that we recognise today.
     * The history of electrical power generation can be traced from its genesis with the Parthian battery (around 200AD) to custom-built examples of generators such as the Hippolyte Pixii (1832) to the first products such as Siemens Generators (1866) to Westinghouse’s utility provision of AC electricity (1886) and the subsequent standardisation of electricity provision from the introduction of the first standard plugs and sockets to standards for transmission and the formation of national grids (UK National Grid, 1926).
     * The history of modern computing infrastructure can be traced from its genesis with the Z3 computer (1943) to custom built examples such as LEO or Lyons Electronic Office (1949) to the first products such as IBM 650 (1953) to rental services such as Tymshare (1964) to commodity provision of computing infrastructure and more recently utility provision with Amazon EC2 (2006). It’s also worth noting the hockey stick effect of the graph. When a novel activity appears, it first evolves mainly through understanding rather than rapidly spreading. As our understanding of the activity increases, we reach a tipping point that the act now rapidly spreads through multiple waves of custom built examples and then products. As the act becomes widespread, our understanding of it increases until this becomes embedded in our social systems and in many cases almost invisible. We no longer consider how it is constructed, it is almost a given and can in many cases be buried in higher order systems as a
       component e.g. the once wonder of the nut and bolt is now hidden inside the machine or the car or the toaster.

   For interest, this hockey stick pattern is similar to that found by Boiset, Canals and Macmillan in their simulation of I-Space using an agent-based approach to modelling knowledge flows. Their work looked at how knowledge spreads through economic and social systems by examining the interactions of agents (i.e. individuals). One of the things they demonstrated confirmed a previous expectation that knowledge is first abstracted and codified before it rapidly diffuses (see figure 81). The is the same pattern within my data where first our understanding and certainty over an activity increases (i.e. it is abstracted and codified) before it rapidly becomes widespread.
See    Figure 81: Simulation of I-Space
 for more details.
   The pattern of evolution that I used as the x-axis of my map had some sense of validity in history. I could with some confidence describe how things would evolve even though I couldn’t say precisely when.

   Looking back, I could now see that the term “innovation” does appear to be currently used to describe changes in different states of evolution. Some things described as “innovations” are genuinely novel, new and hence uncertain activities (i.e. genesis). By virtue of being uncertain then the appearance of these is almost impossible to predict and you cannot know with certainty what will appear. However, many things described as “innovations” are simply improvements to an existing activity and part of a visible process of evolution that is driven by competition. Whilst you cannot predict when these changes will occur as evolution cannot be plotted over time, you can predict what will happen. This notion is contrary to the more random perception of “innovation”. Amazon EC2, a utility computing infrastructure service (commonly known as cloud computing) wasn’t a random accident but instead it was inevitable that some company would provide utility computing infrastructure.

   Far from being like navigators in a storm constantly coping with the maelstrom around us, it appears that the sea has structure. Mapping seemed to have merit and I had a purpose, to teach everyone who would listen. Alas, it was 2008 and I was fast running out of cash. I would have to turn mapping to a profit one way or another.

