Chapter 9 - Section 4.1.: Predictability and Climatic Patterns

   There can be many climatic patterns involved in anticipation. I’ve taken the map from figure 105 and highlighted in orange those you will be familiar with and added in a few others to demonstrate the point. Whilst there are many areas of uncertainty in a map, there’s an awful lot of things we can say about change.
See    Figure 107: Climatic patterns and predictability
 for more details.
   From figure 107, then :
   Point 1 — everything evolves. Any novel and therefore uncertain act will evolve due to supply and demand competition if it creates some form of advantage.
   Point 2 — success breeds inertia. It doesn’t matter what stage of evolution we’re at, along with past success comes inertia to change.

   Point 3 — inertia increases the more successful the past model is. As things evolve then our inertia to changing them also increases.

   Point 4 — no choice over evolution. The Red Queen effect will ultimately force a company to adapt unless you can somehow remove competition or create an artificial barrier to change.

   Point 5 — inertia kills. Despite popular claims, it’s rarely lack of innovation that causes companies to fail but inertia caused by pre-existing business models. Blockbuster out innovated most of its competitors through the provision of a web site, video ordering online and video streaming. Its problem was not lack of innovation but past success caused by a ‘late fees’ model.

   Point 6 — shifts from product to utility tend to demonstrate a punctuated equilibrium. The speed of change across different stages tend to be exponential.

   Point 7 — efficiency enables innovation. A standard componentisation effect.

   Point 8 — capital flows to new areas of value. A shift from product to more industrialised forms will see a flow of capital (marked as a light blue line) from past product companies to utility forms along with investment in those building on top of these services.

   Point 9 — coevolution. The shift from product to more industrialised forms is accompanied with a change of practice.

   Point 10 — higher order systems create new sources of worth. The higher order systems created though being uncertain are also the largest sources of future differential value.

   As you develop skill in understanding the landscape and climatic patterns involved, you will find yourself being able to increasingly anticipate common forms of change.

