Chapter 13 - Section 3.2.: Red Alert!

   My areas of concern pale into insignificance compared to the areas which might have me running out the door screaming, setting the klaxon off. These include :
   Focus on high situational awareness (understand what is being considered)

   I see no evidence of this and a simple mapping of the environment has raised concerns that are not even discussed. I’d want to see clear evidence the company actually understands its environment.

   Use a common language (necessary for collaboration)

   I see an abundance of different graphics but no consistent mechanism of discussion other than verbal stories often laced with terminology. I’d want to understand how we actually communicate.

   Challenge assumptions (speak up and question)

   An extremely valid challenge over sensors was given by the CIO but dismissed and even described as being “discussed several times before”. The palpable sense of “frustration with the group and the CIO on this topic” indicates a team that is not listening. The answers given to the challenge are all symbols of inertia — pre-existing practice, assets etc. I’d be digging here.

   Focus on user needs

   The lack of description of user needs is significant. Statements like “The attrition rate has been high in recent years at 9% but the Sales team believes this is due to a lack of new features and a high cost of software license renewal” are all very well and good but I’m not interested in what the Sales team thinks, I’d want to know what the user needs and wants.

   Think fast, inexpensive, restrained and elegant (FIRE, formerly FIST)

   A £45 million investment on a cloud effort over two years is not what I’d be expecting from a company following FIRE principles. This may be a simple consequence of summarisation to an executive level but I’d want to see evidence that we’re not embarking on building some Death Star.

   Manage inertia (e.g. existing practice, political capital, previous investment)

   Whilst inertia appears to be clear, the only challenge to it (e.g. sensors) is knocked back. In fact the CEO got in on the act talking about intellectual property. I’d want to ask a few more questions here.

   Use a systematic mechanism of learning (a bias towards data)

   I see no evidence of this and of past lessons being applied. There’s no concept of climatic patterns or learning. I’d want to explore this more.

   Exploit the landscape

   I see no evidence of understanding let alone exploiting the landscape. It might exist in mental models and some form of intrinsic common understanding but I’m not overwhelmed by this.

