Chapter 14 - Section 1.1.: The grey play — Pig in a Poke

   I’m going to sell this company (grey point 1). I’m going to want to maximise my return which means I’ll put effort into marketing (point 2) and promoting Phoenix as the future in this market, reinforcing those analyst messages. I’m also going to encourage the marketing team to heavily play on concerns over any cloud effort (point 3). Hence a bit of fear, uncertainty and doubt (FUD) is useful.

   I’m not going to give up on our cloud effort, I’m just going to recommend the cloud project is cut down to less than a million and run as a prototype / experiment. I’ll also pull back on the expansion into Brazil. I want to make sure the company costs are kept down and the company is seen as attractive as possible. I’d also agree that we need to use the data product in the market and look to downsize the team in IT responsible for that. In fact, I have another purpose for them. Whilst, my fellow board members would be aware of this play, I wouldn’t explain it in this way to the executives of the subsidiary. They’d probably disagree, they have oodles of inertia and I don’t want to dampen their enthusiasm. To them, I’d explain one story which is :
   “I agree on the marketing push in our existing market and focusing on our product development. I share your concerns over the security issues of cloud and the competitor being forced to eat their own ecosystem. I wouldn’t like for us to be in that position. I’d like us to scale back on our cloud project for the time being and run a few small scale experiments. I do like the idea of entering the Brazil market but right now I think we need to concentrate on the European market, I wouldn’t want us to lose ground to the US player because we’re focused elsewhere. However, I completely agree with the efficiency drive and removing the in-house capability regarding the dataset. I also agree we should watch the Chinese sensors but our focus needs to be on building up profitability within Europe and making Phoenix soar.”

   I’d also have a quiet chat with the CEO about the problem CIO and offer to move her to another group in the conglomerate in order that the CEO can focus on the task at hand. I’d suggest we have another project which could possibly do with some of those un-needed IT people as well.

   My real goal here is pig in a poke, I want to maximise the capital returned through the disposal of the subsidiary. Before you state that no-one in the market would buy Phoenix then print out the the scenario (chapter 12) and try it out on a group of executives. To make your life easier, I’ve provided a link to [232]a pdf of the scenario. If those executives don’t know how to map, they’ll probably choose the cloud, Brazil and efficiency efforts around data. If you talk to them about whether they think Phoenix has potential, then most will say yes. These are the people you’d want to be selling Phoenix to.

