Chapter 14 - Section 1.2.: The orange play — the Future

   Whilst the grey play is all about making significant capital through a disposal of Phoenix, the orange play in the map above is all about building the future.

   I do want to build that cloud service (orange point 1) but I want the technology based upon the emerging practice that will develop around the commodity sensors (point 2). I’m going to create a secret project, a separate subsidiary to do this and I’m likely to put the CIO I’ve just nabbed in charge. I also want to consider looking at driving these emerging practices to become more standard through an open approach (point 3).

   I won’t be building the service in Europe but in Brazil (point 4). Firstly this is an untapped market but secondly, I want to keep out of the fight between Phoenix and the US player in Europe. Once the new service is established in Brazil and after my disposal of the Phoenix subsidiary then I’m going to look at expanding from Brazil into Europe and the US by exploiting the weakness of those competitors (i.e. their legacy code base based upon expensive sensors). For good measure, I’m going to look for another ILC type ecosystem play around data (point 5) by using an open data approach.

   I’m going to be spending some time on this new subsidiary, making sure it’s setup right and we don’t get a repeat of Phoenix. I’d be looking for cell based structure, use of attitudes, FIRE, willingness to challenge and all that good stuff outlined in doctrine. To begin with, I need four basic teams (see figure 186) which I’m going to have to flesh out pretty quickly but I’d be hoping that the CIO will help me nab a few of the right people from the data group that Phoenix wants to remove.
See    Figure 186: Team structure
 for more details.
   This is how I would play the game in order to maximise the benefit for the conglomerate. The return from the disposal will vastly exceed any investment needed. I could probably use it to fund a dozen new startups whilst returning a generous reward to the conglomerate. However, this play took me 45 minutes. I’m sure with a bit of effort then a better play can be found. Maybe you have it? I am willing to learn.

