Chapter 16 - Section 3.: Where are we?

   We have a map of the landscape, we’ve applied basic economic patterns to anticipate change, we can see opportunity in co-evolved practice and obstacles in inertia to the change, we have financial models and understand how we can trade off higher short term expected returns for building a future position. Though we have inertia, we also have an idea of the types and how to deal with it. Our awareness of the situation is expanding. This is good. This is how it should be.

   In the above, I specifically state “anticipate change” because we cannot predict evolution over time (see xref:#chapter-7-finding-a-new-purpose[chapter 7], section “the trouble with maps”). We must use characteristics or weak signals or information markets to give us a probability of when the change will happen or even if it’s occurring today. Mapping is all about probability rather than time; the uncharted space is uncertain and the industrialised space is more known. To predict over time would mean we could say “in 453 days this [activity or practice or business model] will change from A to B”. As far as I’m concerned that is straying into the realm of charlatans, crystal ball fanatics and soothsayers.

   I often hear people counter with vague notions of time e.g. “at some point in the future”. That is not predicting over time as time requires a “when”. I cannot, nor have I ever been able to predict evolution over time. Of course, I’m fully aware that I have my own inertia caused by my own past success with mapping and that the subject itself will evolve (see xref:#chapter-7-finding-a-new-purpose[chapter 7], section "a map of mapping"). Someone else may well find a way to map over time. I will no doubt dismiss it and be proved wrong. I do hope I have the wit to use my own tool on myself at that time. “When” will this happen? As I said, I can’t predict over time and the weak signals aren’t even strong enough for me to guess.

   In terms of the strategy cycle, we’ve observed the environment and moved onto orientating around it with doctrine such as “manage inertia”. However, let us explore the cycle a bit further.

