Chapter 17 - Section 1.: The Three Horizons

   The three horizons was a model put forward in the Alchemy of Growth, 1999. It discussed three views that any corporation had to take.

   Horizon 1 : the core business which provides the greatest profits and cash flows that need to be extended and defended.

   Horizon 2 : are the emerging opportunities and businesses that will drive medium term growth. These may include new ventures that you are investing in which are expected to generate substantial future profits.

   Horizon 3 : These are ventures that should ensure the company’s long term future. They can include research projects or pilot programs or even investment in startups.

   When I joined Canonical, horizon one was the core support revenue. Horizon two included new concepts such as online storage, the app store and extending onto more devices. Horizon three was … well, I’m quite convinced a few would have thought that my work on cloud would be in this category. Whilst this model of three horizons is a reasonable way of examining a company, I personally find it inadequate. I often find that some confuse it with the pioneer — settler — town planner model of organisation (xref:#chapter-4-doctrine[chapter 4]) by associating town planners with horizon one and pioneers with horizon three. To explain the weakness with the model, I’m going to use the map of mapping that I introduced earlier in xref:#chapter-7-finding-a-new-purpose[chapter 7]. To save you scrambling back through past chapters, I’ve provided that map here in figure 213.
See    Figure 213: The Map of Mapping
 for more details.
   Let us now assume that we decide to use the map of mapping to build a new business. I’m going to take a part of the above map and concentrate around the provision of forecasting (i.e. anticipation of known changes) to others. I could have quite easily built a comfortable life around the weak signals that I had developed for forecasting change by creating a small boutique consultancy providing market and technological forecasts. The premise behind such a business is provided in figure 214. My purpose with such a business would have been to simply survive (i.e. make money), the user would be after an advantage over competitors and would likely measure this by the return on capital invested in a space. The business itself would provide anticipation services based upon known climatic (economic) patterns that use maps of the industry.
See    Figure 214: Forecasting Service
 for more details.
   Horizon one would be that boutique consultancy business. I’d have been protecting (i.e. not making creative commons) the twenty odd common economic patterns that I know about which impact the environment. I’d probably use a worth based mechanism (or outcome based as it is called today) for charging. I could also extend this map to cover in more detail the social capital components of trust and the activities needed to either perform the analysis or run the company. Remember you can map all forms of capital whether data, practice, activity, knowledge or social. Let us hypothesise that I had decide to build this company and by hook or by crook turned it into a small success. What would my horizon two be?

   In this case, the diffusion of knowledge and evolution caused by supply and demand competition would drive many of those components to a more industrialised space. At some point, I’d have to prepare myself for my boutique consultancy entering a world where products did the same thing. I would know in advance that we’d have inertia to that, any shift from one stage of evolution to another (e.g. custom to product) causes inertia through past success. It’s one of the those climatic patterns. I’ve mapped this change in figure 215.
See    Figure 215: Horizon two
 for more details.
   But, with foresight — and I’d hope that I’d be using mapping on myself — then it would be relatively trivial to anticipate and overcome the inertia. How about horizon three? In this case, we get a divergence. I could for example focus on further industrialisation to a more utility service exposed through some form of API — Anticipation as a Service or AaaS for short. Of course, such as change along with mirth over the acronym would come with significant inertia created by any existing product based business model. Alternatively, I could expand into something new such as the use of doctrine for competitor analysis or the arms sale of context specific gameplay or even some novel, uncharted, higher order system that I haven’t even considered. I’ve shown these divergent horizon threes in figure 216.
See    Figure 216: Horizon three
 for more details.
   Now let us add the pioneer — settler — town planner model onto the horizon three map (see figure 217). Remember each team has different attitudes, which is what pioneer, settlers and town planners represent. Each team not only builds but operates and maintains their own work until such time that another team takes it away from them. The important thing to note is that horizon three consists of town planners or settlers or pioneers or all of them depending upon where I choose to focus.
See    Figure 217: PST added to horizon three
 for more details.
   The horizons are context specific. You cannot simply overlay them onto a PST model or even the concept of evolution by saying “genesis is horizon three” as it depends upon where you are and the landscape surrounding you. For example, depending upon where the business is in the map then horizon three could be either genesis of a new act, or shifting a product to a commodity or even a new product. That of course assumes that by horizon three you mean far future. If you stick with horizons as being broadly evolution based (i.e. genesis to product to commodity) then you can find horizon three is sometimes your core business, sometimes your future and sometimes your far future. Horizon’s don’t stack up well with evolution and it quickly becomes messy unless you accept a terminology of horizon one as current to horizon three as far future and allow them to exist on different parts of the map.

   Another thing to note is that the horizons can often be broadly anticipatable. This is the thing I find inadequate with the horizon model because without a map and the learning of common economic (aka climatic) patterns then it becomes all too easy to miss the obvious. It is why I find the three horizons useful as a high level concept but overall weak in practice on its own. It also fails to help me adequately deal with inertia or legacy.

