Chapter 17 - Section 3.: On Porter

   For those unfamiliar with Porter’s five forces, these are rivalry within the industry, threats of new entrants, threats of substitution and the bargaining power of suppliers vs consumers. In this section we’re going to examine these five forces through the lens of the peace, war and wonder cycle (see xref:#chapter-9-charting-the-future[chapter 9]).

   In the time of wonder, it is a battle to become established. The field is not yet developed and there are no “new entrants” as there are no established figures to be “new entrants” against. Everything is new, uncertain and uncharted. It is the wild west, ‘ere be dragons and the home of split infinitives. The consumers hold the power and it is they who decide whether this industry will succeed or not despite their initial inability to know whether they need it.

   In the time of peace, there is a constant tug of war between supplier and consumer power over the products produced. The developing giants are normally well protected from new entrants in a game of relative competition. The exception is the occasional threat of substitution. It is this substitution by a different product which tends to be the dominant factor.

   In the time of war, new entrants providing a more industrialised form of the act threaten the existing giants that are stuck behind inertia barriers. It becomes a fight for survival for these giants and they are often poorly equipped. It is not a case of a product becoming substituted by another product but instead an entire industry being changed to more industrialised forms. It is often assumed that the shift towards utility provision means centralisation but this is not the case.

   Whilst the interaction of all consumers (demand competition) and all suppliers (supply competition) drives the process of evolution, the question of whether a specific activity or data set centralises or decentralises depends upon the actions of individual actors (suppliers and consumers) in this market. For example, it would have been relatively trivial for the hardware manufacturers to create Amazon clones and a price war in the IaaS space around 2008–2010 in order to fragment the market by increasing demand beyond the capability of Amazon to supply due to the constraint of building data centres. I had these exact conversations with Dell, IBM and HP throughout 2008 and 2009. I even told them their own inertia would fight against this necessary change and they would deny the existence of the punctuated equilibrium until it was too late. The fact they didn’t act and lost their own industry is entirely the fault of their own executives and also one of the major factors why have seen
   centralisation in the IaaS space.

   Centralisation depends upon the actions of specific actors (in this case the inaction of hardware suppliers and hosting companies). In the future, this may in fact yo-yo from centralised to decentralised or find a balance between the two (as with electricity provision and self generation). Such a change in the means of production is however unlikely to change the interfaces themselves i.e. a shift from central to self-generation does not mean a change in voltage or frequency for domestic power provision. The future interfaces of computing have already been defined.

   The point to remember with Porter’s forces is the balance between these forces tends to change as any component evolves. It also isn’t static within a stage of evolution — for example the yo-yo between centralisation and decentralisation with a corresponding yo-yo between Supplier and Consumer bargaining power. However as a general guide, I’ve provided in figure 222 the most dominant forces you’re likely to encounter.
See    Figure 222: Porter’s forces and evolution
 for more details.
